<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE refentry PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN" "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.2/docbookx.dtd">
<refentry id="odf2epub">
  <refentryinfo>
    <productname>odfpy</productname>
    <author><firstname>Søren</firstname><surname>Roug</surname>
    <contrib>Original author</contrib>
    </author>
  </refentryinfo>
  <refmeta>
    <refentrytitle>odf2epub</refentrytitle>
    <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
    <refmiscinfo class="manual">User commands</refmiscinfo>
  </refmeta>
  <refnamediv>
    <refname>odf2epub</refname>
    <refpurpose>Convert ODF to an ePub ebook</refpurpose>
  </refnamediv>
  <refsynopsisdiv>
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>odf2epub</command>
      <arg choice="opt">-p </arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-o <replaceable>outputfile</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-c <replaceable>cover_image</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="plain">
        <replaceable>path</replaceable>
      </arg>
    </cmdsynopsis>
  </refsynopsisdiv>
  <refsect1>
    <title>Description</title>
    <para><command>odf2epub</command> is a program that will create 
an ebook (.epub) from the input file and will write the ebook to stdout or a file specified by -o.
"Path" is assumed to be an
OpenDocument file of text, spreadsheet or presentation type.
</para>
    <para>
If the document doesn't have a title in the properties, then the first heading of any level is used.
</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>Options</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>-c, --cover</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>
The -c argument add a cover image to the EPUB file.
Make sure the cover image itself is scaled to less than 1000px in width and height. Best practice
is to use an image in JPG or PNG format at 600 pixels wide by 800 pixels in height.
</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>-p, --plain</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>
The -p flag will generate HTML without CSS.
</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>-o, --output</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>
Specify the output file with this flag. "-" implies standard out.
</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>Example</title>
    <screen>
odf2epub -o example.epub odf-file.odt
</screen>
  </refsect1>
  <refsect1>
    <title>Bugs</title>
    <para>The EPUB format has the following limitations when running on a mobile  device.
    If these limits are not adhered to, EPUB files <emphasis>might</emphasis> not work on mobile devices. Image Size: 10MB uncompressed.
    Individual XHTML file sizes: 300k uncompressed/100k compressed. Odf2epub does not ensure
    that these limits are adhered to.
              </para>
  </refsect1>
  <refsect1>
    <title>See Also</title>
    <para><command>odf2xhtml</command>(1)</para>
  </refsect1>
</refentry>
