<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE refentry PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN"
   "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.2/docbookx.dtd">
<refentry id="gbtext2odt">

<refmeta>
<refentrytitle>gbtext2odt</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</refmeta>

<refnamediv>
<refname>gbtext2odt</refname>
<refpurpose>Create OpenDocument from Project Gutenberg text</refpurpose>
</refnamediv>

<refsynopsisdiv>
<cmdsynopsis>
    <command>gbtext2odt</command>
    <arg choice="opt">-e <replaceable>encoding</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-a <replaceable>author</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-c <replaceable>creation date</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-l <replaceable>language</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-n <replaceable>etext</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-p <replaceable>publisher</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-t <replaceable>title</replaceable></arg>
    <arg choice="opt">-T</arg>
    <arg choice="opt"><replaceable>inputfile</replaceable></arg>
</cmdsynopsis>
</refsynopsisdiv>

<refsect1><title>Description</title>
<para>
Project Gutenberg is the first and largest single collection of free
electronic books, or eBooks.
The project started in 1971, and the chosen format is
"Plain Vanilla ASCII," and this makes the text frustrating to read.
Therefore the gbtext2odt program will convert such a text to
OpenDocument and add some light markup.
The idea behind the program is to test the feasibility of using
OpenDocument for archival of documents.
</para>
<para>
&quot;Inputfile&quot; is assumed to be an eBook from Project
Gutenberg in text form. Books work pretty well, whereas plays,
such as <emphasis>Romeo and Juliet</emphasis>, will probably be
messed up.
</para>
</refsect1>

<refsect1><title>Options</title>
<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term>-e <replaceable>encoding</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
Enter the encoding of the source eBook. Common encodings are: iso-8859-1,
cp1252 (default), ascii and utf-8
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-a <replaceable>author</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
The name of the author. Entered into the metadata.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-c <replaceable>creation date</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
The date of the creation. Entered into the metadata.
This can be the date of conversion, or the date the author completed his document.
The format must be in ISO 8601 format. I.e. YYYY-MM-DD or YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-l <replaceable>language</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
Language of the eBook. It consists of a two or three letter language code
taken from the ISO 639 standard optionally
followed by a hyphen and a two-letter country code.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-n <replaceable>etext</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
Adds the Gutenberg E-text number to the metadata.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-p <replaceable>publisher</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
The name of the publisher. Entered into the metadata.
Defaults to Gutenberg Project
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-t <replaceable>title</replaceable></term>
<listitem>
<para>
The title of the document. Entered into the metadata.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>-T</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Use the title as the output filename, rather than based on the input filename.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</refsect1>

<refsect1><title>Example</title>
<para>
Conversion of <citetitle>Herodotus’ Histories</citetitle> from around 430 BCE. Known from the movie
<citetitle>The English Patient</citetitle>. The OpenDocument standard doesn't understand creation dates
that are before common era, so we won't add the publication date to the meta data.
</para>
<screen>
wget http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext01/1hofh10.txt
gbtext2odt -e cp1252 -t "The history of Herodotus — Volume 1" -a Herodotus -l en -T 1hofh10.txt
</screen>
</refsect1>

<refsect1><title>See Also</title>
<para>
http://www.gutenberg.org
</para>
</refsect1>

<refsect1><title>Issues</title>
<para>
OpenOffice doesn't handle creation dates before the year 1000.
</para>
</refsect1>

</refentry>

